# 2.1 Intro to CUDA C++

## 2.1.2 Kernels

```C++
__global__ void vecAdd(float* a, float* b, float* c, int length) {
    int thread_id = threadIdx.x + blockDim.x * blockIdx.x;

    // 2D dim
    // int idx = threadIdx.x + blockIdx.x * blockDim.x;
    // int idy = threadIdx.y + blockIdx.y * blockDim.y;
    // int thread_id = idx + idy * gridDim.x * blockDim.x;
    if (thread_id < length) {
        c[thread_id] = a[thread_id] + b[thread_id];
    }
}

int threads = 256;
int blocks = cuda::ceil_div(length, threads); // <cuda/cmath>
vecAdd<<<blocks, threads>>>(dev_a, dev_b, dev_c, length);

```

## 2.1.3 Memory in GPU Computing

### 2.1.3.1. Unified Memory

Memory is allocated using the `cudaMallocManaged` API or by declaring a variable with the `__managed__` specifier.The NVIDIA Driver will make sure that the memory is accessible to the GPU or CPU whenever either tries to access it.

```C++
float* a = nullptr;
float* b = nullptr;
float* c = nullptr;
float* cpu_res = (float*)malloc(length*sizeof(float));

cudaMallocManaged(&a, length*sizeof(float));
cudaMallocManaged(&b, length*sizeof(float));
cudaMallocManaged(&c, length*sizeof(float));

vecAdd<<<(length+255)/256, 256>>>(a, b, c, length);
cudaDeviceSynchronize();

cudaFree(a);
cudaFree(b);
cudaFree(c);
free(cpu_res);
```

### 2.1.3.2. Explicit Memory Management

explicitly allocates memory on the GPU using `cudaMalloc`. 

```C++
    float* A = nullptr;
    float* B = nullptr;
    float* C = nullptr;
    float* comparisonResult = (float*)malloc(vectorLength*sizeof(float));
    
    // Pointers for device memory
    float* devA = nullptr;
    float* devB = nullptr;
    float* devC = nullptr;

    //Allocate Host Memory using cudaMallocHost API. This is best practice
    // when buffers will be used for copies between CPU and GPU memory
    cudaMallocHost(&A, vectorLength*sizeof(float));
    cudaMallocHost(&B, vectorLength*sizeof(float));
    cudaMallocHost(&C, vectorLength*sizeof(float));

    // Initialize vectors on the host
    initArray(A, vectorLength);
    initArray(B, vectorLength);

    // start-allocate-and-copy
    // Allocate memory on the GPU
    cudaMalloc(&devA, vectorLength*sizeof(float));
    cudaMalloc(&devB, vectorLength*sizeof(float));
    cudaMalloc(&devC, vectorLength*sizeof(float));

    // Copy data to the GPU
    cudaMemcpy(devA, A, vectorLength*sizeof(float)cudaMemcpyDefault); // cudaMemcpyHostToDevice
    cudaMemcpy(devB, B, vectorLength*sizeof(float), cudaMemcpyDefault);
    cudaMemset(devC, 0, vectorLength*sizeof(float));

    ......

    // Copy results back to host
    cudaMemcpy(C, devC, vectorLength*sizeof(float), cudaMemcpyDefault);
```

The `cudaMemcpy` API is synchronous. That is, it does not return until the copy has completed. 

The code uses `cudaMallocHost` to allocate memory on the CPU. This allocates page-locked memory on the host, **which can improve copy performance and is necessary for asynchronous memory transfers.** In general, it is good practice to use page-locked memory for CPU buffers that will be used in data transfers to and from GPUs. Performance can degrade on some systems if too much host memory is page-locked. **Best practice is to page-lock only buffers which will be used for sending or receiving data from the GPU.**

## 2.1.4 Synchronizing CPU and GPU

>kernel launches are asynchronous with respect to the CPU thread which called them. This means the control flow of the CPU thread will continue executing before the kernel has completed, and possibly even before it has launched. In order to guarantee that a kernel has completed execution before proceeding in host code, some synchronization mechanism is necessary.

The simplest way to synchronize the GPU and a host thread is with the use of `cudaDeviceSynchronize`, which blocks the host thread until all previously issued work on the GPU has completed.

>In larger applications, there may be multiple streams executing work on the GPU and cudaDeviceSynchronize will wait for work in all streams to complete. In these applications, using Stream Synchronization APIs to synchronize only with a specific stream or CUDA Events is recommended. 

**Best performance is usually achieved when synchronization is kept within a thread block.**

## 2.1.5 Runtime Initialization

The CUDA runtime creates a CUDA context for each device in the system. This context is the primary context for this device and is initialized at the first runtime function which requires an active context on this device. The context is shared among all the host threads of the application. As part of context creation, the device code is **just-in-time compiled** if necessary and loaded into device memory. This all happens transparently. 

>As of CUDA 12.0, the `cudaInitDevice` and `cudaSetDevice` calls initialize the runtime and the primary context associated with the specified device. The runtime will implicitly use device 0 and self-initialize as needed to process runtime API requests if they occur before these calls. This is important when timing runtime function calls and when interpreting the error code from the first call into the runtime. 

## 2.1.7. Error Checking in CUDA

```C++
#define CUDA_CHECK(code) { gpu_assert((code), __FILE__, __LINE__); }
inline void gpu_assert(cudaError_t code, char* file, int line) {
    if (code != cudaSuccess) {
        fprintf(stderr, "CUDA Error: %s %s %d\n", cudaGetErrorString(code), file, line);
        exit(code);
    }
}
```
**It is important to note that the error state returned from any CUDA API call can also indicate an error from a previously issued asynchronous operation.**

The CUDA runtime maintains a `cudaError_t` state for each host thread. The value defaults to `cudaSuccess` and is overwritten whenever an error occurs. `cudaGetLastError` returns current error state and then resets it to `cudaSuccess`. Alternatively, `cudaPeekLastError` returns error state without resetting it.

### 2.1.7.1 Asynchronous Errors

The CUDA error state is set and overwritten whenever an error occurs. This means that errors which occur during the execution of asynchronous operations will only be reported when the error state is examined next. As noted, this may be a call to `cudaGetLastError`, `cudaPeekLastError`, or it could be any CUDA API which returns `cudaError_t`.

When errors are returned by CUDA runtime API functions, the error state is not cleared. This means that error code from an asynchronous error, such as an invalid memory access by a kernel, **will be returned by every CUDA runtime API until the error state has been cleared by calling cudaGetLastError.**

### 2.1.7.2 `CUDA_LOG_FILE`

Another good way to identify CUDA errors is with the `CUDA_LOG_FILE` environment variable. When this environment variable is set, the CUDA driver will write error messages encountered out to a file whose path is specified in the environment variable. 


```C++
__global__ void k()
{ }

int main()
{
        k<<<8192, 4096>>>(); // Invalid block size
        CUDA_CHECK(cudaGetLastError());
        return 0;
}

$ nvcc errorLogIllustration.cu -o errlog
$ ./errlog
CUDA Runtime Error: /home/cuda/intro-cpp/errorLogIllustration.cu:24:1 = invalid argument

$ env CUDA_LOG_FILE=cudaLog.txt ./errlog
CUDA Runtime Error: /home/cuda/intro-cpp/errorLogIllustration.cu:24:1 = invalid argument
$ cat cudaLog.txt
[12:46:23.854][137216133754880][CUDA][E] One or more of block dimensions of (4096,1,1) exceeds corresponding maximum value of (1024,1024,64)
[12:46:23.854][137216133754880][CUDA][E] Returning 1 (CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_VALUE) from cuLaunchKernel
```

Setting `CUDA_LOG_FILE` to stdout or stderr will print to standard out and standard error, respectively. Using the `CUDA_LOG_FILE` environment variable, **it is possible to capture and identify CUDA errors**, even if the application does not implement proper error checking on CUDA return values. This approach can be extremely powerful for debugging, but the environment variable alone does not allow an application to handle and recover from CUDA errors at runtime. 

## 2.1.8. Device and Host Functions

`__global__`
`__device__`
`__host__`

## 2.1.9. Variable Specifiers

CUDA specifiers can be used on **static variable declarations** to control placement.

`__device__` specifies that a variable is stored in Global Memory.
`__constant__` specifies that a variable is stored in Constant Memory.
`__managed__` specifies that a variable is stored as Unified Memory.
`__shared__` specifies that a variable is store in Shared Memory.
When a variable is declared with no specifier inside a `__device__` or `__global__` function, it is allocated to registers when possible, and local memory when necessary.

## 2.1.10 Thread Block Clusters

Similar to how threads in a thread block are guaranteed to be co-scheduled on a streaming multiprocessor, thread blocks in a cluster are also guaranteed to be co-scheduled on a GPU Processing Cluster (GPC) in the GPU.

The number of thread blocks in a cluster can be user-defined, and a maximum of 8 thread blocks in a cluster is supported as a portable cluster size in CUDA.Note that on GPU hardware or MIG configurations which are too small to support 8 multiprocessors the maximum cluster size will be reduced accordingly.Identification of these smaller configurations, as well as of larger configurations supporting a thread block cluster size beyond 8, is architecture-specific and can be queried using the `cudaOccupancyMaxPotentialClusterSize` API.

All the thread blocks in the cluster are guaranteed to be co-scheduled to execute simultaneously on a single GPU Processing Cluster (GPC) and allow thread blocks in the cluster to perform hardware-supported synchronization using the **cooperative groups** API `custer.sync()`. Cluster group also provides member functions to query cluster group size in terms of number of threads or number of blocks using `num_threads()` and `num_blocks()` API respectively. The rank of a thread or block in the cluster group can be queried using `dim_threads()` and `dim_blocks()` API respectively.

Thread blocks that belong to a cluster have access to the **distributed shared memory**, which is the combined shared memory of all thread blocks in the cluster. Thread blocks in a cluster have the ability to read, write, and perform atomics to any address in the distributed shared memory.

### Launching with Clusters in Triple Chevron Notation

A thread block cluster can be enabled in a kernel either using a compile-time kernel attribute using `__cluster_dims__(X,Y,Z)` or using the CUDA kernel launch API `cudaLaunchKernelEx`.
If a kernel uses compile-time cluster size, the cluster size cannot be modified when launching the kernel.

```C++
// Compile time cluster size 2 in X-dimension and 1 in Y and Z dimension
__global__ void __cluster_dims__(2, 1, 1) cluster_kernel(float *input, float* output)
{

}

int main()
{
    float *input, *output;
    // Kernel invocation with compile time cluster size
    dim3 threadsPerBlock(16, 16);
    dim3 numBlocks(N / threadsPerBlock.x, N / threadsPerBlock.y);

    // The grid dimension is not affected by cluster launch, and is still enumerated
    // using number of blocks.
    // The grid dimension must be a multiple of cluster size.
    cluster_kernel<<<numBlocks, threadsPerBlock>>>(input, output);
}
```




